---
title: The Emergency Button--How to Escape
permalink: better_part_of_valor.html
sidebar: mydoc_sidebar
# tags: [special_layouts]
keywords: help, escape, leave, switch labs, hopeless, future
# summary: "You can use an accordion-layout that takes advantage of Bootstrap styling. This is useful for an FAQ page."
toc: false
folder: mydoc
---

<p> Although we hope you can resolve your problems and continue to pursue your academic goals as planned, we recognize that not all situations have happy resolutions. On this page, we have included resources on how to cope with or leave an unhealthy environment. Your options may include counseling (either through GT's CARE office or external therapy), finding a new advisor or co-advisor, taking a leave of absence, converting to a different degree, or leaving Georgia Tech altogether.</p> 

<p>We hope that none of the more extreme responses will be necessary for you, but our hope is not a promise: we, the graduate students on the ME Mental Health Committee who built this tool, have each taken advantage of one or more of these options ourselves. We have done so in the hopes that our boundaries, reports, and examples will make for a healthier environment for other students, who may or may not be able to take actions as extreme as ours.</p>

<h2>On-Campus Counseling</h2>
<p>CMHCR is the go-to office on-campus for any mental health concerns or issues, for everything from stress management to suicidal thoughts to screening for learning disabilities that may require university accommodations. Depending on the timing and severity of your concern, you can contact them by phone or using their walk-in hours, as described on their website here: <A href="https://mentalhealth.gatech.edu/">https://mentalhealth.gatech.edu/</A>. You are also encouraged to refer friends and acquaintances to CMHCR if you have concerns about their mental health. </p>
<p>Be aware that walk-ins often involve a long wait in the office. If you have a crowded schedule and an urgent need, you may want to make an appointment, call the emergency line, or reach out to an external therapist directly. (For this reason, if you are able, please consider seeking support in advance rather than waiting for a crisis.) </p>
<p>Typically, your first appointment at CMHCR will involve filling out forms, followed by a one-on-one, in-person assessment. Depending on your situation, you may be referred to a group stress-reduction workshop, a personal on-campus counselor, or both. More rarely, emergency care services may be suggested. CMHCR can also provide referrals to psychiatrists’ offices, but this is not done in the initial assessment except upon request. </p>
<p><em>Note: medication for mental health issues can only be provided by a psychiatrist, not a psychologist/therapist and often not by a primary care physician. If you suspect you may need medication, follow the pathway described on this website: <A href="https://health.gatech.edu/psych/">https://health.gatech.edu/psych/</A>.</em></p>
<p>CMHCR counseling services are often convenient for students on-campus, but it’s important to realize that this is not your only option for therapy. Standard GT Healthcare plans provide access to online therapy through your United Healthcare Insurance portal (<A href="https://myaccount.uhcsr.com/mybenefits">https://myaccount.uhcsr.com/mybenefits</A>) and to off-campus in-network providers for a $20 (as of 2021) copay per session. You can choose this option whether or not you are offered individual on-campus counseling, if you don’t feel you are benefiting much from your on-campus CMHCR counselor, or if the CMHCR counselors are already fully booked with other students. For more information on seeking counseling outside of CMHCR, refer to the <A href="#ExternalTherapy">External Therapy</A> section below.</p> 

<h2><a id="ExternalTherapy">External therapy</a></h2>
<p>CMHCR is a free on-campus resource provided to you for assessing your mental health needs and referring you to resources that can help, but you are not required to use it. You can bypass CMHCR entirely if you so choose and go straight to off-campus mental healthcare providers. Check your insurance coverage, and then go to the website below to look for therapists in your area:</p>
<ul><A href="https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/therapists?search=30332">https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/therapists?search=30332</A></ul>
<p>The above website can be used to find external psychiatrists as well.</p>
<p>Things you might want to pay attention to while you search for therapists: you can screen by gender, race, faith, or other attributes that might  make you more comfortable. You might also consider looking up therapists who specialize in your mental health condition (assuming you know it) or in particular styles of therapy. One of the most common and effective styles of therapy currently in practice is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, which focuses on correcting inaccurate and unhelpful thought patterns, but there are also options such as Dialectical Behavior Therapy (for emotional management strategies), and others that may be particularly helpful for a specific condition. It may be helpful to do a web search for therapies that are recommended for specific mental health conditions, if you know what you’d like to be treated for. If you don’t, don’t worry too much. Before you get started with a therapist, you’ll have an initial appointment or screening call where you’ll talk with the therapist about your situation and concerns. If they believe you may have a situation that would require something specific or that they cannot provide, they will inform you, and can usually make referrals to another practice.</p>

<h3>Things to know about getting started with a therapist:</h3>
<p>You do not need to stick with the therapist you start with. It’s common for the first few sessions to be uncomfortable. Depending on the kind of discomfort, this may even be a good thing, so don’t give up on therapy altogether if you have a first session or two that don’t seem helpful. If after a few weeks you don’t feel like things are progressing, you can politely let them know that you don’t plan to do a follow-up, and go back to the website to find another therapist. (One of the students on the ME Mental Health Committee went through five therapists before finally finding one that was a good fit.)</p>


<h2>Leave of Absence</h2>
<p>The process for taking a leave of absence (LOA) is much simpler than the process of informing your PI about it: you simply do not register for a semester, and you will neither be paid for that semester nor expected to work. The department operates its pay on semester-long time frames, unfortunately: you will not be permitted to take less than a semester off, and the time off can’t start mid-semester. (If you have a medical or personal emergency, this is something to work out with your advisor and the department separately. Be aware that health insurance may be affected by your enrollment. Student health insurance for summers is typically purchased along with the spring semester, but double-check your coverage regardless and see if you need to enroll in something outside of Georgia Tech in the interim.</p> 
<p>In better news, you can take off two back-to-back semesters without having to worry about repercussions at the university level; simply register for the semester when you would like to come back, and everything proceeds as normal. Absences longer than two sequential semesters will result in the university moving you off of its list of current students, and you will have to reapply and be reaccepted in order to continue your grad school work. Theoretically this is trivial, as your prior graduate student work confirms your eligibility, so your advisor speaks on your behalf to the admissions committee and you should be reaccepted without any difficulty.</p>
<p>It’s worth noting that leave of absences have been used to allow students to leave Georgia Tech in order to start a job before the conclusion of their PhD. So long as committee members are still accessible and your advisor is willing, you can theoretically take years off of your PhD and then re-enroll. This has sometimes been done for students who are all-but-dissertation: providing that they have satisfied the PhD requirement of working on-campus for at least one year (this requirement was according to the original version of the ME grad student handbook; I cannot find it on the website now so this may be obsolete), they can leave campus and complete the writing at their leisure, then come back and re-enroll for a semester for a single credit hour in order to defend their thesis.</p>
<p>The one-credit-hour registration may only be permissible in the semester in which you graduate. Check your local department or institute graduate student handbook to confirm.</p>

<h2>Switching labs</h2>
<p>The hardest part about switching labs is finding a new professor who has the space and the funding to take you in. The second-hardest part is,of course, figuring out how (and when) to tell your current advisor. Some departments have expected rotations or trial periods for students, in which case a short stint in a lab isn’t seen as a big deal, but most of them do not. So, unless you are part of a cross-disciplinary institute with a different culture than your home department, there will be some political ramifications to your move. There is also often a time cost, depending on how long you have spent in your original lab and how gracefully you can bridge from your old research topics to your new one.</p>
<p>All of that takes courage. We salute you.</p> 
<p>It’s rare for a student to decide to leave their lab without trying other recourses first. You will typically have talked to the Graduate Student Advocate, the Department Associate Chair for Graduate Studies, and/or the Assistant Vice Provost for Advocacy and Conflict Resolution for mediation options before you get to this point. If it is instead your advisor who terminated the relationship, then see the <a href="/pages/mydoc/find_advisor.html">"Finding a New Advisor"</a> page. It usually creates even more friction if you attempt to recover an advisor/student relationship after it has reached this point; there are few cases where it would be advisable to try. However, if you believe you have been treated unfairly, you can make a complaint. You can look up your options at the <a href="/pages/problem-identification/">Problem Identification and Solutions Pathways</a> tab.</p>

<h2>Master out</h2>
<p>This option applies specifically to PhD students who are not finding success in their research lab, and are uncertain if the time cost and political ramifications justify an attempt to switch labs. It also applies to both Masters and PhD students who have begun a research-based degree, but now believe that their coursework will provide them with sufficient education and experience. It is also a solid way to gain credit for the time you spent pursuing an advanced education without getting bogged down by the ambiguous timelines and success metrics associated with a research-based Masters or PhD degree.</p>
<p>Mastering out is a wonderful option that we believe should be considered with less stigma. Just as you discover new concepts through research, you may discover that you are best able to maximize your happiness and career productivity through the pursuit of a shorter degree with less ambiguous milestones. A PhD does not usually increase your career-long earning potential beyond what a Masters degree provides; the additional years spent in school offset any increase in salary. As a result, though there are reasons to get a PhD, for many people, there may be more reasons not to.</p> 
<p>Being able to walk away from your research-based degree and still be able to receive credit for your time is powerful. We recommend that you consider choosing your course load to enable this option, should you ever decide to take it. A PhD is a long enough commitment that priorities and life circumstances can change throughout its duration; it is a kindness to your future self to provide yourself with a satisfying alternative, should you desire it. We believe that students who remain able to freely choose to continue will do so with more enthusiasm and less stress than those who have no other viable option than to continue. We have also seen students who have become very vulnerable near the end of their PhD, having put too much time in to leave empty-handed, while their very seniority made them so valuable to their advisors that their graduation dates were delayed and delayed again. Setting yourself up to have a celebration-worthy alternative exit will prevent you from acting out of desperation or accepting untenable compromises if you ever do need to have an uncomfortable conversation with your advisor.</p>

<h2>Switch to a different university</h2>
<p>For those who are set on accomplishing their PhD, but cannot find a professor with a compatible research focus, funds, or who has openings for new students here at Georgia Tech, the only option for acquiring your PhD may be to find a lab outside the university. This option is intensely disruptive: you will almost certainly need to move in order to accomplish it, and you will need to apply to the new university as a fresh graduate student, just as you did to Georgia Tech. This will likely feel disheartening, but consider ways you may be able to leverage your position: you may be able to transfer credits, advertise your current experience as a way to stand out to a favorite professor or university, and you may be able to accomplish your PhD more efficiently than a student without the experience you've gained. It may be advantageous to gain a Masters degree (or second Masters) from Georgia Tech to create a natural transition point to the new university. Godspeed, my friend.</p>
